Introduction
In this lab, you will be introduced to the Linux operating system. An operating system, sometimes
referred to as simply the OS, is a special software program that facilitates communication between
computer hardware and other computer software, as well as the user interacting with the computer
software. There are many different types of operating systems out in the world, but you are likely
familiar with some of the more popular client ones such as Windows, macOS, iOS, and
Android.
Linux is just another type of operating system that is developed by a community of users and published
as Open Source software that can be freely* used by anyone. In fact, Android, a popular smartphone
operating system, is built on top of the Linux Kernel. The Kernel is the underlying software that does the
actual work and is often paired with different groups of software applications to create what is known as
a distribution. Android is one example of distribution developed for mobile devices. Other popular
“distros” include; Ubuntu, Debian, Red Hat and thousands more. Each distribution is built to serve a
specific purpose. In this lab we will be using Oracle Linux, which is essentially a free version of the popular
Enterprise Red Hat distribution.
Part One: Exploring the Linux GUI
Like many popular operating systems today, Linux does have a Graphical User Interface or GUI. This is an
interface that allows the user to interact with graphical elements using a keyboard, mouse, or touch
screen. The graphical elements include icons and menus that make it easy and intuitive for the user to
navigate and operate the OS and the applications installed.
The first thing we must do is log into our system to access. Open the virtual machine window and you
will see the list of users that have accounts on this system. Our system only has one user currently,
‘Student’.

Click on the user name
• Enter the password student
Note: Passwords are case sensitive
Once you are logged in, you will see the user’s desktop. Much like Windows and macOS, this is a space
where a user can create shortcut Icons, save documents, and access other tools and applications.

 

In the top left corner, you will see one menu; Activities.
If you click Activities, you will see a list of different groups of tools and applications that are already
installed on the system in the Dock. Let’s start with some that should be familiar.
• Click on Activity.
• Then click the Firefox icon

 

Now let’s take a look at the system settings.
• Click Activities>Show Applications>Settings.

• Click on Background from the settings menu.
• Click on the Background image to select it

• Click on the Colors tab.
• Select the color you’d like to set and click Select in the top right.

You can see the new setting has applied. There are many other settings that can be configured from the
menu, but we will learn more about those in upcoming labs.